+++
date = "2017-06-15T23:46:21+02:00"
title = "Off Beat"

+++
## Pluralizing Rhythm

Rhythm has no owner. It does not belong to a particular time, place, art form, discipline, person, body, sense, or even itself. Rhythm constantly slips away. We do not conceive the concept as specific to music, literature, nature, or anything else. We rather focus on rhythm's displacements, its trajectories and dispersions are a telling fact. Its ongoing itineraries reveal that the concept - despite being around for god knows how long - still manages to fend off any attempt to end or stabilize its movements. Rhythm does not simply lack a legitimate owner, it actively resists all forms of appropriation. 

Whereas we do not approach  rhythm's displacements as a problem, it does pose a practical challenge to this volume. How to approach a concept that constantly slips away? An obvious and common tactic to grasp the ungraspable is to throw a net over it. Many theoretical accounts of rhythm do exactly that: they try to fit its unpredictable movements into regular structures. Princeton's New Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics, for example, defines rhythm as follows:

> A cadence, a contour, a figure of periodicity, any sequence of events or objects perceptible as a distinctive pattern capable of repetition and variation. (1066-1067)

In this account, rhythm is defined by the patterns it produces. The lure of such a formal definition is that it offers a universally applicable analytic framework. Patterns can be discovered everywhere: in music, poetry, nature, mathematics, astronomy, statistics, everyday life, etc. As such, they can serve as a common ground for the analysis of heterogeneous phenomena. A formalist account of rhythm is thus especially suited for interdisciplinary research. Shared structured allow specialists from different backgrounds to work together without the need to know the specifics of each others disciplines. 

In spite of the appeal of a common interdisciplinary framework, this volume does not subscribe to a formalist account of rhythm. An understanding of rhythm as organized patterns is too broad, and thus cannot explain the concept's specificity. From a structural perspective, rhythmic patterns do not intrinsically differ from other patterns. Any structure can be called a rhythm and vice versa. Moreover, these patterns may be helpful to interpret other phenomena, but fail to account for rhythm itself. Whereas seasons, lullabies, star constellations, and crime figures are all characterized by structured patterns, the fact that they are organized alone does not explain their rhythmicity. Rhythm keeps slipping through the holes of the net. The concept becomes operational by being transformed into a broadly applicable analytic schema, but loses its specificity in the process. Rhythm is nothing but a name: formalism leads to nominalism.

Apart from being too broad, we argue, a formalist account is too narrow as well. By reducing rhythm to patterns, two of its defining characteristics disappear: movement and experience. Etymologically, rhythm derives from the Greek verb "rheo" which means "to flow". Plato explains it as "order in movement" (Laws 2.665a) and thereby defines the two necessary elements of the concept. The problem with a formalist account of rhythm is that it only explains the order and not the movement. As a matter of fact, in order to grasp the rhythmic patterns at all, the flow needs to be coagulated. Structures emerge at the expense of movement. Processes only lend themselves to analysis, when they are interrupted. Such interventions, though, are an epistemological precondition for knowledge per se and not a problem as such. Our main objection to a formalist approach to rhythm lies in the fact that it cannot take its own operations into account. It is blind for its own practice.

The fact that rhythm's actual displacements cannot be grasped, does not necessarily mean that we have to settle for a reductionist, formal definition of the concept. Whereas it may be impossible to fully comprehend rhythm, it is equally impossible not to experience it at all. Our senses are constantly confronted with its effects. Through auditory, haptic, visual, gustatory, and olfactory stimulation, rhythm manifests itself to the body. Better yet, we subscribe to Friedrich Nietzsche's idea that it is, in fact, this inter-sensory play of affects that constitutes a body. In On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense (1873), the philosopher explains this idea as follows:

> To begin with, a nerve stimulus is transferred into an image: first metaphor. The image, in turn, is imitated in a sound; second metaphor. And each time there is a complete overleaping of one sphere right into the middle of an entirely new and different one. One can imagine a man who is completely deaf and has never had a sensation of sound and music. Perhaps such a person will gaze with astonishment at Chladni's sound figures: perhaps he will discover their causes in the vibrations of the string and will now swear that he must know what men mean by "sound." (Nietzsche, 110)

Nietzsche argues that all knowledge starts from experience, but is also irreducible to it. All that exceeds immediate bodily sensations is produced by precise and specific operations. In the above quote, the philosopher details the genesis of conceptual metaphors, such as body, subject, or structure, meticulously. To him, concepts are the effects of projections from one type of nerve stimuli upon another sense: synesthesia. 

Understood as the inter-sensory play of sensations, rhythm (temporally not logically) precedes the bodies that perceive it.  Our theoretical account of the concept therefore departs from embodied experience. Nevertheless, this shift from formal structures to bodily sensations is not without risks. Whereas patterns are manifest to anyone, affects are only perceived by a particular body. Because of the dangers of subjectivism and relativism, academic research on rhythm has often been reluctant to fully explore the role and function of experience. The New Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics for instance, does acknowledge the importance of rhythmic perception, but at the same time points out the risk of subjectivism:

> The mind is not some Lockean tabula rasa, a passive recipient of impressions; rhythmic perception is very much an active organization of sense-data, and when critics turn from the poem as object of perception to studying individual perceivers and their acts of perception, they enter a great wilderness of mostly uncharted terrain. (1068)

This volume choses to ignore this well-intended warning. We find that the danger of unbridled relativism presumes an outdated conception of experience. Perceived rhythms are only subjective as long as the body is considered the possessor of sensations. Nietzsche's reversal of this relation of ownership, however, obstructs the theoretical shortcut from empiricism to relativism. Again, affects precede the individual, human body and can therefore not be subjective by definition.

In this introduction, we develop an interdisciplinary concept of rhythm that neither settles for formalism nor for relativism. We do not resort to cognitivism either, since it is our belief that this middle ground inherits the problems of both other approaches. It explains subjective sensations through (culturally or universally) shared patterns - so-called image schema - that are inscribed in the brain and/or other parts of the human body. In our view, however, cognitive theory thereby erases all the particularities that make an individual's embodied experience a fascinating object of analysis. Whereas affects are our point of departure as well, we do not privilege the human subject. On the contrary, one of the aims of this introduction is to show how rhythm can actually help overcome traditional, subjectivist accounts of embodied experience. 

The first part of this introduction, "Hung Up on Bones,"  uses Marshall McLuhan's post-humanist concept of technologically extended bodies to transform rhythm from an inter-sensory into an inter-medial play of sensations. We argue that rhythmic affects have the power to bring together the heterogenous, artificial parts that constitute McLuhan's extended bodies. Still, we want to avoid the suggestion that rhythm only unites. Rhythmic affects can just as easily destroy these same bodies. An inter-medial, rhythmic interplay of affects can be either constitutive or damaging to them. 

The second part of the introduction, "Big Pills and Small Pills," starts from the assumption that rhythm entails both meanings of pharmakon[*]: medicine and toxin. We argue that it is neither possible nor desirable to reduce the concept to one of these two meanings. Rhythm neither cures nor poisons all bodies under all circumstances, but has the potential to do either. Its healing powers differ from body to body, and even more importantly, they are contingent on the manner in which rhythm is used. Rhythm can be poisonous or antidotal depending on the applied operation.
The concept of rhythm that is developed in this introduction does not unite everyone and everything everywhere. In fact, not even all contributions in this volume subscribe to this concept. Although our account of rhythm is not as broadly applicable as a formal definition, it does open up possibilities for interdisciplinary research. Affects precede concepts, and are therefore shared across all disciplines. 

Embodied experience, however, is marked by cuts, shifts, and suspensions as much as the patterns and structures they produce. We argue that these rhythmic operations can and should not be universally applicable, but need to remain precise and specific. In fact, as announced in the title of this volume, we even prefer to speak of the concept in plural. "Arrhythmia" and "polyrhythmia" are central to our project, because these concepts - that I will discuss below - prevent rhythm to be mistaken for an omnipresent or omnipotent power. Only as spatially and temporally bounded - and thus plural - phenomenon, does it have the potential to structure and organize movement, 

As Plato claimed, movement and order are equally important to rhythm. However, he forgot to mention that it also takes interventions to distinguish these two aspects as such. Only through irreducible acts of displacement are ungraspable flows transformed into analyzable patterns, and the other way around. Still, these interventions come in many shapes and colors. Rhythmic operations are not universally applicable; they vary among different times, places, art forms, disciplines, persons, bodies, and senses. 

Displacements are not external but inherent to our concept of rhythm. We find that they should be acknowledged and repeated rather than ignored and avoided. This volume does not offer a consensual or harmonious account of rhythm. Its contributions, as described in the third part of this introduction "A Practice of Rhythm," often overlap, contradict, avoid, and even ignore one another. To us, however, such flaws and imperfections are indispensable to the approach to rhythm that we propose in this volume. We do not conceive them as accidental differences but as irreducible acts of displacement. Through such operations, this volume proposes a dynamic practice of rhythm rather than a fixed definition. 


## Hung Up on Bones
>> Hip bone connected to my thigh bone   
>> My thigh bone connected to my leg bone   
>> My leg bone connected to my ankle bone   
>> I get so hung up on bones   
   
>> – Parliament

In the chapter "The Gadget Lover" in Understanding Media (1964), Marshall McLuhan transforms Nietzsche's philosophical concept of the body into a media-theoretical one. He argues that bodies are engaged in an ongoing process of mutual adaptation with technology. They are not only shaped by their physical capacities - if they have any - but also by their artificial extensions. To McLuhan, the primary function of such "gadgets" is to help the body with physical and mental tasks that it needs to complete. Differently put, the invention of technological extensions is a defense mechanism of the body, which prevent overstimulation of its central nervous system:

> In the physical stress of superstimulation of various kinds, the central nervous system acts to protect itself by a strategy of amputation or isolation of the offending organ, sense, or function. Thus, the stimulus to new invention is the stress of acceleration of pace and increase of load. (McLuhan 46)

McLuhan defines the body by its capacity to be stimulated by sensations. The central nervous system - rather than the heart or any other organ - is thus most vital to him. Whenever that "electric network" (47) gets overburdened, the body will get rid of the source of its stress. Prolonged exposure to bright lights leads to (temporary) blindness; sudden loud sounds causes (instant) deafness. This is what McLuhan defines as auto-amputation: to prevent a complete meltdown, the central nervous system cuts off the overburdened organ/

Parallel to the amputation of its own functions, the body needs to find ways to compensate for these losses. Technological gadgets are its countermeasure. They are invented to relieve the body of the stress caused by overstimulation. In order to explain this, McLuhan mentions the obvious example of the wheel:

For example, in the case of the wheel as an example of an extension of the foot, the pressure of new burdens resulting from the acceleration of exchange by written and momentary media was the immediate occasion of the extension or "amputation" of this function from our bodies. The wheel as a counter-irritant to increased burdens, in turn, brings about a new intensity of action by its amplification of a separate or isolated function (the feet in rotation). Such amplification is bearable by the nervous system only through blocking of perception. (46-47)

Whereas technology starts out as a relieve for physical discomfort, it can easily become a cause of irritation or sickness itself. To McLuhan, the body can only handle a limited amount of stimuli simultaneously. Its total perceptive capacity needs to distributed over the individual senses. As a result, a person that stands in an extremely aromatic kitchen or an equally intense back alley will see, hear, smell, taste, and feel less than normal. Targeted amplification of one, specific kind of sensory stimuli can thus be used as a method for narcosis. As an example, McLuhan mentions the Audiac: a device that confronts dental patients with very loud noises. Because of this amplification of auditory sensations, the patient no longer feels pain. 

This holistic concept of the body leads McLuhan to conclude that a hyperactive, and one-sided use of a certain technological extension can thus invoke the central nervous system to block out certain stimuli. In such cases, however, not only the sense that causes the stress gets numbed, but all the others as well. General narcosis is the body's response to targeted irritation of a specific sense. 

> Any invention or technology is an extension or self-amputation of our physical bodies, and such extension also demands new ratios or new equilibriums among the other organs and extensions of the body. (49)

McLuhan's concept of sensory equilibriums allows us to reformulate the relation between rhythm and the body. The latter is no longer restricted to its physical capacities, it is now also constituted by its technological extensions. In effect, rhythm is now an inter-medial instead of an inter-sensory play: it redistributes technologically amplified affects between the different senses and thereby prevents the overstimulation of the central nervous system. McLuhan defines this process of redistribution as therapy:

Therapy, whether physical or social, is a counter-irritant that aids in that equilibrium of the physical organs which protect the central nervous system. Whereas pleasure is a counter-irritant (e.g. sported, entertainment, and alcohol), comfort is the removal of irritants. Both pleasure and comfort are strategies of equilibrium for the central nervous system. (47)

Therapy is the exact opposite of narcosis. In the latter case, the body is bombarded with amplified stimuli in order to numb central nervous systems. In the former, the same affects are used to reach an new equilibrium between the senses. Rhythm is the play between inter-medial sensations and thus seems to be closely related to therapy. Still, sensations can only be redistributed if the reached status quo is not eternal. In other words, the occasional disruption of a given equilibrium is just as important as its establishment. Rhythm can be used as an irritant as well as a counter-irritant. 

Rhythm is a strategy to either cause or cure the sensory self-amputations that McLuhan describes. Whereas its therapeutic use may be more attractive, its narcotic applications should not be ignored either. More importantly, rhythm should not be mistaken for a panacea. Its power, for therapy as well as narcosis, is limited. Better yet, these treatments only work because of rhythm's limitations. Apart from looking at this pill's benefits, it may be even more important to determine its side-effects. In order to properly asses its medicinal potential for technologically-extended bodies, it is necessary to define the circumstances in which rhythm is a cause or a cure for sickness.


## Big and Small Pills   

>> They say the bigger the headache,   
>> the bigger the pill   
>> Baby, call me the big pill.   
   
>> – Parliament   

Rhythm is often treated as a panacea, an antidote to the alleged problems of so-called (post-)modernity, such as fragmentation, dispersion, and acceleration. The benefits of this big pill are substantial: it offers a form of identity that does not rest on shared values, ideals, or truths, but merely on a common division of space and time. Whether this structure is embraced or contested does not really matter. Even the battlefield is a place that unites1 differences. Rhythm’s healing powers do not depend on the patient’s approval of the cure. The pill does not have to taste nice in order to heal.

Still, it would be a mistake to conceive the symptoms, the diagnosis, and the antidote as unique to the here and now. As we have mentioned above, even Plato already conceptualized rhythm as a structuring, organizing, and unifying movement. But whereas the Greek philosopher reserved this power for specific practices – in particular music and ethics – the subsequent trajectory of the concept has been one of emancipation from concrete human activity. Rhythm became increasingly autonomous, abstract, and metaphysical. This development reached its summit in German romanticism, when the philosopher Friedrich Schelling granted the antidotal concept of rhythm its ultimate formulation:

> Die in der Musik selbst wieder als besondere Einbildung der Einheit in die Vielheit oder reale Einheit ist der Rhythmus. (Schelling in HWP, 1030) 

In this quote, rhythm is understood as a cosmic unifier. Conflicts and differences are either surface-effects or temporary obstacles towards the formation of a whole. Rhythm is the underlying force that already has or will unite everything. Romantic as this may sound, though, the idea of rhythm as a cure-all is still in fashion today. We would even argue that this antidotal concept dominates contemporary musical, philosophical, and commonsensical conceptions of rhythm. Take, for instance, this quote from French philosopher Henri Lefebvre, in which he prescribes rhythm to cure pathological cases: 

> Eurythmia (that of a living body, normal and healthy) presupposes the association of different rhythms. In arrhythmia, rhythms break apart, alter and bypass synchronization (the usual term for designating this phenomenon). A pathological situation agreed! – depending on the case; interventions are made, or should be make, through rhythms, without brutality. (67) 

Rhythm: the big pill that regulates irregularities and cures all possible conditions, sorrows, and illnesses. Despite its immediate and persistent appeal, this panacea2 does not come without side-effects. The first complication is what we call panrhythmia. By understanding rhythm as a cosmic unifier, the concept becomes hermetic and all-inclusive. There is no arrhythmia: even those events that do not fit, somehow have to fit. The antidotal concept of rhythm privileges the rule over the exception, repetition over difference, the whole over its parts, structure over event, and the existing order over change. In short, in this definition rhythm is a guard of being rather than a vanguard of becoming.

A second related but slightly different side-effect is monorhythmia. If rhythm unites everything, it cannot be multiple itself. There is no polyrhythmia: perceived differences between rhythms3 are only apparent. Closer inspection reveals that they are in fact manifestations of one and the same primordial beat. As long as rhythm is mistaken for a panacea, this concept not only transforms the plural into the single but also erases all differences within itself.

Hyperrhythmia, which we here define as the condition whereby rhythm is entirely removed from practice, is a third complication of the antidotal concept. Autonomy transforms rhythm into a metaphysical perpetuum mobile that functions automatically without the need for interventions. People can choose to either follow or break with a rhythm, but neither of these acts will have an effect. Rhythm proceeds with or without them. Individuals are subjected to rhythm but can never become its subject. They are slaves to the rhythm.  

The fourth and final problem is that – despite, or maybe thanks to, the omnipresence and omnipotence that is attributed to it – rhythm is seen as a reactive tool rather than a creative force. Rhythm can merely mend together the pieces that were already broken. Its temporal mode is that of lag: rhythm is always (too) late: metarhythmia. It might be a cure-all, but it is not a vaccine. Rhythm cannot prevent the patient from getting sick.

Since, in this antidotal concept, rhythm becomes everything and everything is rhythm, these side-effects mostly harm the cure itself. In fact, we contend that rhythm’s transformation to panacea did not heal the universe, but made rhythm ill. Specificity and heterogeneity are not flaws but positive qualities of rhythm. Only as a concrete and local – thus plural – phenomenon does rhythm have the power to structure and organize. Without a link to at least one specific practice, the concept is reduced to a dead metaphor. This volume is an attempt to cure rhythm by debunking its nearly esoteric aura of a cosmic unifier. 

Fortunately, German romanticism does not only mark the culmination of the historical development outlined above, but also signals the beginning of a different concept of rhythm. In Philosophy of Art, Schelling argues that rhythm is not subordinate to temporality but the other way around. Rhythm structures time; the latter is subjected to the former. This means that the specific temporality that we diagnosed earlier as one of the side-effects of the antidotal concept of rhythm is reversed: metarhythmia becomes prorhythmia. Rhythm does not mold a unity out of heterogenous elements, but heterogeneity is an effect of rhythm.  

Unwittingly and unwillingly, Schelling turns rhythm from a peacemaker into a warmonger. It is no longer only a structuring and organizing principle, but also a force of destruction. Rhythm only holds together what it first breaks. Rhythm is thus not just unifying; it is also pluralizing. Whereas Schelling still privileges the former over the latter, we propose to shift the emphasis. This is the first out of two ways in which we understand the title of this volume, Pluralizing Rhythm.

The second way in which we understand our title refers to rhythm itself rather than its effects. Our title should be understood as a call for polyrhythmia. In this volume we want to pluralize rhythm in order to cure it of pan-, mono-, and hyperrhythmia. As outlined above, up until the nineteenth century rhythm’s history is marked by ever-increasing autonomy and hegemony. This process of emancipation is not only marked by gain but also by loss. Rhythm is not merely liberated from external restraints, but also removed from practice and everyday life.  

Before rhythm got metaphysical, it was a musical as well as an ethical principle. Praxis connected both initial meanings of the term. In fact, rhythm’s broader significance – and subsequently its emancipation – directly derives from the fact that it is not an abstract principle but a very concrete know-how. This is, for instance, apparent in one of the earliest and best known reflections on rhythm: ‘Book III’ of Plato’s Republic: 
> [M]usical training is a more potent instrument than any other, because rhythm and harmony find their way into the inward places of the soul; on which they mightily fasten, imparting grace, and making the soul of him who is rightly educated graceful, or of him who is ill-educated ungraceful; and also because he who has received this education of the inner being will most shrewdly perceive omissions or faults in art and nature, and with a true taste, while he praises and rejoices over and receives into his soul the good, and becomes noble and good, he will justly blame and hate the bad, now in the days of his youth, even before he is able to know the reason why; and when reason comes he will recognize and salute the friend with whom his education has made him long familiar. (Plato 73)

In this quote, Plato distinguishes ethics from morality. The philosopher is concerned with the training of good citizens, but does not define any intrinsic characteristics or rules of conduct that should lead to the formation of such citizens. The value of rhythm and harmony4 consists in the fact that they teach a person to instinctively tell right from wrong without actually spelling it out. This does not mean that to Plato music is abstract and detached from life. The fact that harmony and rhythm are embedded in a specific practice, and correspond to a unique know-how, makes them concrete by definition. Morality, on the other hand, always needs to abstract from the specificity of the here and now in order to define universalized and general norms, laws, and other rules. To Plato, ideally people would not need any imposed restrictions to become decent citizens. Through proper musical training – hence the connection between ‘praxis’, ‘to practice’, and ‘practice’ – they will eventually internalize an infallible moral compass.

Echoes of Plato’s ethical understanding of music can still be heard in German Romanticism. Unsurprisingly, however, the emphasis has now shifted from its didactic potential to its unifying power. In Ideas, for instance, Friedrich Schlegel claims:
> ”Music is more closely related to morality, history to religion; for rhythm is the idea of music, but history deals with the primitive." (Schlegel 100)

Just like Schelling, Schlegel privileges rhythm over time. To him, temporality – here in the form of history – is ultimately unfit as a structuring principle and is therefore linked to the primitive. Rhythm, on the other hand, has proven in music that it has the power to unite differences. Schlegel therefore suggests that the same force that manages to hold together notes or instruments may also be used to unite the individuals in a state. Contrary to Plato’s vision, music and ethics in Schlegel are not connected through a common praxis but synthesized into a transcendent unity.

Despite these crucial shifts and differences, it is important to recognize what all these conceptualizations of rhythm have in common. From Plato to German Romanticism, rhythm has always been understood as an ethical as well as a musical principle. It has been invested with the potential to organize, discipline, and rule the self and others. Ethics is thus not secondary or external but an integral part of the concept of rhythm.

It is thus no coincidence that Friedrich Nietzsche makes his intervention in rhythm’s conceptual history in an ethical rather than musical context. In ‘Of the Virtue that makes Small’ in Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Nietzsche’s proto-philosopher travels to a town that he has visited before and notices that everything has shrunk. Wondering what has made everything smaller, Zarathustra observes that it is people’s rhythm, or, better yet, their lack of it.

> Ask my foot if it likes their melodies of praise and enticement! Truly, to such a measure and tick-tock beat it likes neither to dance nor to stand still. (Nietzsche 188-189)

Rhythm is implied but not explicitly mentioned in this quote. Nietzsche only defines it negatively, in opposition to the notion of meter (or measure). Meter is a regular, cyclical pattern, best illustrated by the metronome or the clock. Both these mechanical devices, however, respect the flow of time, which is never interrupted, disrupted, or reversed. The divisions made by metronomes and clocks - later defined by McLuhan as an machines that separate time from the rhythms of human experience5 - are superimposed on temporal processes; they are quantitative rather than qualitative. Meter therefore does not have any structuring power of its own. It simply provides everything with a position according to predefined rules or standards. Meter cannot recognize the new since its value is already predetermined.

Moreover, it is important to realize that the German word for meter (“Takt”) is also part of the expression “den Takt angeben” which literally means “to conduct” and figuratively “to rule”. In Zarathustra’s case, this connotation of the word is crucial. By imposing their measure on him, the inhabitants of the town try to rule over the philosopher. More precisely, they want Zarathustra to conform to the measure they have subjected themselves to.

> They would like to lure and commend me to small virtue; they would like to persuade my foot to the tick-tock measure of a small happiness.(189)

Meter equals moderation equals mediocrity. These are just a few of the names that Nietzsche’s  “virtue that makes small” goes by. Zarathustra also mentions plenty of others: happiness, humbleness, generosity, and so on. This “bedwarfing” virtue appears in many different guises but its function is always the same: domestication.

Even though the town’s inhabitants try to impose this virtue on Zarathustra, it would be a mistake to think that they are in control over this measure. It is their morality that rules them. These people have a “small virtue” but no values, meter but no rhythm. Values and rhythms are creative, virtue and meter submissive. Nietzsche thereby brings in an aspect of relativity and temporality into the concept of rhythm. One person’s rhythm can become someone else’s meter. In the same fashion, someone’s value can become someone else’s virtue. These distinctions cannot be made independently of specific comtexts: rhythm and meter are discursive notions. 

To Nietzsche, meter is not a structuring and organizing but a normalizing and domesticating power. This has to be understood literally. Meter is a force that produces rules, law, and standards. By juxtaposing rhythm to meter, Zarathustra transforms rhythm into a power that breaks with or stands outside these norms. Whereas meter is a conservative principle, rhythm is a critical or subversive political force. 

On the one hand, Nietzsche’s concept of rhythm marks a return to Plato. Both these philosophers conceive rhythm as a concrete and ethical rather than a metaphysical and moral force. As soon as it gets detached from praxis, rhythm loses its power to structure and organize. On the other hand, Nietzsche also clearly breaks with Plato’s philosophy. As opposed to Plato, Nietzsche’s rhythm does not lead to an undefinable but universal understanding of "good." On the contrary, each rhythm separates good and evil in its own precise and specific manner. It does not teach a person to do the right thing, it simply urges her to act.  

In Plato, the concept of rhythm was inextricably linked to practice and harmony. Nietzsche shows that, in its subsequent development, the concept’s emancipation took the wrong direction. Instead of removing itself from practice, rhythm should have been separated from harmony. From Plato until Schelling, rhythm and harmony remained almost synonymous. Both principles are understood to mend a unity out of plurality. Nietzsche, however, shows that they are distinct. The difference is simple: harmony is primarily unifying, rhythm pluralizing. Rhythm is not a principle of consensus but of dissensus. 'Of the Virtue that makes Small' shows that agreement leads to meter and one (small) virtue whereas conflict brings rhythms and values. This places the distinction between meter and rhythm at the heart of Nietzsche’s philosophy. It is vital to his so-called transvaluation of all values. In order to truly understand pluralism, it is necessary to understand the excess of rhythmical practices. 

Rhythm should be clearly distinguished from meter. Nietzsche’s critique to his predecessors and contemporaries is both very simple and infinitely complex: all existing theories have failed to give an account of the difference between these two concepts. As long as events are conceived as part of a past, current, or future whole, rhythm does not exist. The romantic concept of rhythm, for instance, is exposed as meter in disguise. Schelling and Schlegel still prioritized the one over the many and – as a direct consequence – time over rhythm. Zarathustra, though, refuses to dance to the tick-tock of the clock. His feet demand more than the periodical repetition of the same. But, what exactly is this surplus value of rhythm?

In just a few sentences, Zarathustra transforms rhythm from a metaphysical foundation to a philosophical enigma. Without even explicitly mentioning the term, Nietzsche's proto-philosopher introduces a problem that many twentieth-century philosophers failed to solve: What distinguishes rhythm from meter?6 We argue, however, that this long-standing enigma does not need to be solved. Better yet, solving the problem misses the point. Rhythm is not a problem to Nietzsche: it is the solution. In the prologue to Zarathustra, Nietzsche writes:

> I tell you: one must have chaos in one, to give birth to a dancing star. I tell you: you still have chaos in you. (Nietzsche 46)

To Nietzsche, the difference between measure and rhythm lies in the unexpected, and can therefore not be defined once and for all. Arrhythmia: order needs an element of chaos, which is completely different from being chaotic. This element of chaos is an act rather than a quality. In order to perform such an unexpected act, an element of order is equally necessary. There is no omnipresent and omnipotent rhythm that structures everything in the same way. Instead, there are many rhythms that all organize in a unique manner. Arrythmia and polyrhythmia are both necessary to counter the aforementioned side-effects of the antidotal concept of rhythm. 

Through Nietzsche, we can finally illuminate the second understanding the title Pluralizing Rhythm. We believe that rhythm itself is and should be plural. In fields as diverse as music, culture, nature, and economy, rhythm can be seen as a phenomenon that simultaneously connects and divides. It suggests a certain measure with which people, practices, and cultures can comply. Yet, for this very reason rhythm can also function as a field of exclusion, contestation, and debate. In that sense, rhythm possesses an underestimated potential for knowledge production. Whereas its connecting force is often accentuated in the aesthetic, political, and commercial usage of the term, the underexposed divisive aspect of rhythm is at least as important.

Rhythm is not a panacea. It is neither omnipresent nor omnipotent. Still, this does not mean that it cannot cure some symptoms, just not all and – even more importantly – not all at the same time. Rhythm is an antidote that only works in small dosages. It does have the power to structure and organize, but only if it is treated as a local, specific, and singular phenomenon. In this volume, we focus on the particularities of different practices of rhythm, rather than come up with a general theory of the concept. Several small pills might be more effective than a big one. 


## A Practice of Rhythm   

This volume consists of contributions that combine the political, aesthetic, musical and theoretical dimension of rhythm. These essays consider the unifying as well as disruptive potentials of rhythm by performing a close analysis of texts and objects from contemporary arts, music and politics. In short, this volume complicates, disturbs and pluralizes the notion of rhythm.

By reading and listening to the Buena Vista Social Club, Timothy Yaczo in his essay “The Buena Vista Social Club and the Repeated Island” explores the complex relations between music, sound, rhythm, nostalgia, and glocalization. He proposes two different settings for hearing the Buena Vista Social Club. The first is connected to the rhetoric of world music – as a musical world-making – and the second focuses on the polyrhythmic features as a specific mark of "The Carribean.". Yaczo argues that listening to Buena Vista Social Club seems to affect the sense of time and place and that the listener is, in that process, dealing both with contemporary musical- and political practices.  

In his essay “Turn The Machine Into A Sloppy Machine - Donna Summer, Giorgio Moroder and 'I Feel Love,'“ Tilman Baumgärtel discusses the rhythmic ambiguity and tension between the technological and the organic in the track “I Feel Love” by Donna Summer and her producer Giorgio Moroder. Through a close reading of the song and the conditions of its production, Baumgärtel comes to the conclusion that Moroder manages to transform artificially sounding synthesizer loops into an organic pulse. The producer thereby dissolves and suspends seemingly antithetical oppositions and turns them into displacements and decenterings.

Birgitte Stougaard analyzes the role of rhythm in hip hop music and culture. In her essay, “Aesthetic Experience and Aestheticization - The Rhythm of Hip Hop Music," she points out the significance of aesthetics, and especially rhythm, as a meaning-creating feature. Stougaard argues that this feature transgresses from rap itself unto hip hop culture in a broader sociological sense. Her analysis focuses on a certain laid-back feeling - of primarily old school groove-oriented songs - that influences the moves, gestures and performance of hip hop attitude in an everyday sense. 

Dietmar Elflein’s essay ”Overcome the Pain – Rhytmic Transgression in Heavy Metal Music” rethinks the role of rhythm in rock music in general and Heavy Metal in particular. The author tries to find an answer to the question: what attracts people worldwide to the culture and music of Heavy Metal? One of his answers is that Heavy Metal's ‘glocal’ attraction' is connected to the rhythmic quality of the music. This essay introduces the concept of "rhythmic transgression" to designate the excess of power and control that structures both Heavy Metal culture and music.

Marie Gelang's “Kairos, the Rhythm of Timing” is a study in the field of rhetorics that investigates tempo and rhythm in a speaker’s nonverbal communication. Gelang explains and discusses "Kairos" historical and contemporary use. She thereby relates the concept to the sensing of the right moment, which is often described as timing in everyday experience. Apart from dealing with Kairos on a conceptual level, Gelang's essay also analyzes it in relation to empirical studies that discuss the teaching practices of university lecturers.

In their collective essay “Rhythm and Balance in Sculpture and Poetry”, Eva Lilja and Lena Hopsch transform rhythm into a tool for analyzing different art forms – here, sculpture and poetry. Through an analysis of a poem by Sylvia Plath and one of sculpture by Naum Gabo, they aim to broaden the understanding of rhythm in time, as well as the assimilation of rhythm in space. Lilja and Hopsch claim that the experience of being a moving body in a room is basic to any apprehension of rhythm. This definition is then carried out on the basis of cognitive theory and develops the concept of balance as a visual and a spatial phenomenon.

In his essay “Postcolonial prosody and Indo-Anglian poetry,” Peter Groves explores the idea that poetic rhythm functions as a potent signifier of cultural difference and identity. He studies rhythm in the works of two Indo-Anglian poets, in which he discovers a clash between an Indian ‘rhythm of life’ and the metrics of English poetry. This essay analyzes the postcolonial problem of bringing together culture, language and poetic forms through the concept of rhythm and the role of the pentameter. Groves thereby challenges and transforms English poetic rhythm.

Shintaro Miyazaki in his essay “AlgoRHYTHMS Everywhere - a heuristic approach to everyday technologies” brings up the importance of rhythm in what he names the post-digital era. He discusses rhythm in the field of media-archaeology as an inter-modal tool with meaning-creating potential in both a techno-cultural and epistemological sense. Miyazaki does so by introducing and developing the concept of algorhythm a combination of the words "algorithm" and "rhythm". This juxtaposition emphasizes how rhythm in a post-digital era can productively analyze cultural objects and their relation to media-based situations.

Jodi Brooks explores the interplay between invisibility, temporal sensibility, and filmic caesuras in her essay “Invisibility’s Beat: Ralph Ellison, Rhythm and Cinema’s Blind Field.” Through readings of Ralph Ellison’s novel Invisible Man (1952) and King Vidor’s film Stella Dallas (1937) Brooks discusses the possibility of cinematic rhythm. To develop such a notion, she uses concepts like suspended beats, ‘missed’ beats and collaborative expectancies (Steven Feld) between film and spectator. "Invisibility's Beat"  thereby maps a field between rhythm, gaze and filmic spectatorship.

Jan Hein Hoogstad

## Works Cited

Lefebvre, Henri. Rhythmanalysis – Space, Time and Everyday Life. London: Continuum, 2004. Print.

## Endnotes
1. See Heidegger - The Age of the World Picture
2. See Jacques Derrida's essay "Plato's Pharmacy" in Disseminations
In Lefebvre, the notion of polyrhythmia paradoxically functions as this ultimate rhythm 
4. Plato does not really distinguish between these terms. In fact, it is often remarked that the philosopher had excellent knowledge of harmonic theories of his time (reference), while? theories on rhythm were completely alien to him. … His ignorance, however, has far reaching theoretical consequences. …
5. "As a piece of technology, the clock is a machine that produces uniform seconds, minutes, and hours on an assembly-line pattern. Processed in this uniform way, time is separated from the rhythms of human experience. The mechanical clock, in short, helps create the image of a numerically quantified and mechanically powered universe. By coordinating and accelerating human meetings and goings-on, clocks increase the sheer quantity of human exchange." (McLuhan Real Time)
6. Whereas this question may sound simple in theory, Zarathustra's riddle – that comes in many different shapes and forms – proves to be impossible to solve. Theoreticians such as Theodor W. Adorno, Walter Benjamin, George Bataille, Gaston Bachelard, Henri Lefebvre have all failed to find an answer
