+++
date = "2017-06-15T23:55:52+02:00"
title = "oh baby"

Oh Baby, I Like It Raw
+++
Engineering Truth

ÒIn those days, it was either live with music or die with noise, and we chose rather desperately to live.Ó1

The Oxford dictionary, and its nonacademic equivalent urbandictionary.com, reveal that the title of Ol' Dirty Bastard's hit 'Shimmy Shimmy Ya'2 could refer to a ragtime dance, a flamboyant person, the vibration of a car's wheels, a quick shuffle with the torso, an upwards movement, a priest's chemise, or women's undergarment. Anyone who listens to the song, however, knows that it really does not matter. The ODB is defined by a distinctive flow; his unique style of rapping that finds itself somewhere in between mumbling, shouting, and singing. Every utterance that escapes his mouth immediately turns into nonsense: flatus vocus. There is no room for meaning, not even polysemy. Coming from the Ol' Dirty Bastard, ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ can only be understood as a ludicrous utterance, the absolute opposite of meaning, pure form. The incomprehensibility of the title is programmatic for the entire song. The rhymes are only there to emphasize the beat. "Lyrics get hard, quick cement to the ground!" The words are devoid of a deeper meaning. 'Shimmy Shimmy Ya' solely consists of rhythmical rambling.
	"Shimmy shimmy ya, shimmy yam, shimmy yay, Gimme the mic so I can take it away." Whereas the typical gangster bragging in the first verse may still be mistaken for meaningful lyrics, the second verse makes sure that no one misses the song's radical intervention. Here, the words don't even sound as if they are uttered by a human being Ð not even a complete lunatic Ð anymore. Something more subtle is at hand, though; the second verse marks the symbiosis of the Ol' Dirty Bastard and technology. In fact, the strange noise is actually simply the first verse played backwards. The sound of this reversed sample, however, is irreducible to its source. On the contrary, the reversed sample preposterously determines the original lyrics. The second verse eliminates even the vaguest echo of meaning that haunted the first verse. Words have become random noises without any linguistic content. When man and machine come together, they liquidate the symbolic order. 
	Language, however, is the form of expression of this very article and of academic discourse in general. Through the process of eliminating meaning, Ol' Dirty Bastard removes himself as far from the labor of the archetypical scholar as one can imagine: noise versus meaning production. As his absolute opposite, the rapper challenges the implicit and explicit conventions surrounding the figure of the intellectual and the corresponding concepts of knowledge. In order to acknowledge the academic relevance of his contestation, however, one has to be willing to ignore (of rather forgive) his complete lack of political correctness. The few sentences in his oeuvre that are not completely nonsensical are more often than not violent, racist, or sexist. Focusing on these minor provocations, however, completely misses the point. ODB is not about a message, not even a political one. 
	OlÕ Dirty Bastard is simply a mouth that produces noises, an instant dissemination machine. His sublimation into a single organ is manifested in his physical appearance. Whilst rapping, ODB basically becomes his mouth. The rapper thereby places himself in a long tradition of minstrel figures,4 with one crucial difference, though. When ODB opens his mouth, a black hole with shining gold teeth awaits us, ready to tear all words to pieces and spit them out as pure noise.
	This process of dissemination is not limited to the words of his lyrics, but also applies to OlÕ Dirty BastardÕs identity.5 In numerous interviews, the rapper emphasized that he shaped his character after 'the drunken master' Ð a character with a swaying fighting style from the movie An Old Kung Fu Master (1980). This remains the best way to describe the ODB, who died in 2004 from a cocaine-initiated heart attack. His performance on and off record resembled that of a perverted alcoholic at closing time. OlÕ Dirty Bastard does not embody a single personality; he gives voice to many conflicting ones. This schizophrenia is reflected in the numerous pseudonyms that he uses, such as: dirty Ð the professor, the bebop specialist, the specialist, prince delight, ason unique, unique ason, osiris, cyrus, big baby jesus, dirt mcgirt, dirt schultz, olÕ dirt dawq, joe bananas, and freeloading rusty. In accordance with his lyrics, however, the alter egos don't refer to multiple personalities but to an inherent lack of character.
	The lyrics of 'Shimmy Shimmy Ya' as well as the figure of the Ol' Dirty Bastard are as far removed from meaning and sense as one can imagine. Still I would like to argue that the song is invaluable to contemporary academic discourse. It is exactly because of its completely nonsensical nature that 'Shimmy Shimmy Ya' allows us to look 'beyond good and evil'. The song takes up the challenge that was first posed by Friedrich Nietzsche in 'On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense' (1873), but which Ð after a long historical paradox called the linguistic turnÊÐ still hasn't found a satisfactory solution: to overcome language. 'Shimmy Shimmy Ya' reveals the inadequacy of words and makes an attempt to go beyond them by employing a strategy first described by Friedrich Kittler in Gramophone, Film, Typewriter (1985). This strategy consists of (1) using the gramophone Ð and other sound equipment Ð rather than the pen or typewriter (2) producing noise as a way to bypass the symbolic order, and (3) most importantly, replacing the knowledge of the scholar with that of the sound engineer. In case of 'Shimmy Shimmy Ya' the engineer Ð or more specifically the producer Ð is the RZA.
	ÒMy producer slam, sharp like bam! Chop that down, pass it all around!Ó OlÕ Dirty BastardÕs cousin RZA is the musical and strategic mastermind behind Wu-Tang Clan Ð a hip-hop collective of which the ODB was also a member. Especially in his early productions, such as Wu-Tang's debut album Enter the Wu-Tang (1993), RZA's style was marked by a gritty, nostalgic sound that is often described as low-fidelity. Paradoxically, these noise-heavy songs like 'Shimmy Shimmy Ya' were produced on (more or less) state of the art sequencers and drum machines rather than vintage turntables and mixers. This is a paradox, because Kittler defines noise as specific to analogue media; a transitory phenomenon that disappears with the emergence of their digital successors. From a technical perspective, noise is an a priori to analogue media whereas digital media are built around the exclusion of it. I will argue, however, that RZA is an engineer exactly because he operates his equipment against the grain. He does not just use digital media but (re)invents them through a series of interventions. In the second half of this essay, I will look at the five specific interventions that lead to ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ.
	The figure of the engineer actually finds its academic predecessors in Claude LŽvi-Strauss' The Savage Mind (1962)6 and Michel de Certeau's The Practice of Everyday Life (1980).7 A real, practicing sound engineer, such as the RZA, however exceeds these theoretical representations. In fact, I will argue that the engineer rather than the scholar is the creative agent of contemporary knowledge. Even the extreme figure of Ol' Dirty Bastard is nothing but an effect of RZA's technological interventions. The engineer acquires agency exactly because he bypasses the symbolic order and directly deals with the materiality of the medium. Or as ODB puts it: "Hey, baby, I like it rawww... Yeah baby, I like it RAWWW!!!" The engineer is Nietzsche's new man; an intellectual that does not try to find a universal truth but one that produces its own truths instead.

Overcoming Language
Returning to Friedrich NietzscheÕs posthumously published essay ÔOn Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral SenseÕ today might seem like a pointless exercise. In the century that followed the German philosopherÕs death, his radical critique of language Ð more precisely a correspondence theory of truth Ð has become a commonplace of poststructuralist theory. I will argue, however, that NietzscheÕs text still has not been grasped in its full radical nature. In my opinion, ÔOn Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral senseÕ should not only be read as a critique of language, it could also be interpreted as an invitation to bypass the symbolic order altogether. 
	Nietzsche criticizes words and concepts for being originally and ultimately conventional. All language starts with the act of naming and therefore establishes a metaphorical rather than a necessary relation between word and object. The arbitrariness of language's origin cannot be overcome. 
ÒWhat then is truth? A movable host of metaphors, metonymies, and anthropomorphisms: in short, a sum of human relations which have been poetically and rhetorically intensified, transferred, and embellished, and which, after long usage, seem to a people to be fixed, canonical, and binding. Truths are illusions which we have forgotten are illusions; they are metaphors that have become worn out and have been drained of sensuous force, coins which have lost their embossing and are now considered as metal and no longer as coins.Ó8 
No matter how complex a theory gets, it can never exceed the status of a tautology: concepts are metaphors and theories are allegories or parables. To Nietzsche, words can only correspond to words. Truth can never be a predicate of relations between signs and world because language is completely anthropomorphic The only ÔtruthÕ that the philosopher and the scientist can discover are the human conventions themselves.
	Philosophy and science, however, are not the only realms in which metaphors maintain a central position. Nietzsche claims that they are just as essential in myth and art. Rather than different activities, myth and art are opposite aspects of the same drive or impulse. The Ôrational manÕ Ð the name that Nietzsche gives to the agent of philosophy and science Ð is aimed towards construction, whereas the Ôman of intuitionÕ Ð the agent of myth and art Ð invents and transforms metaphors in order to confuse and distort these same constructions. Nonetheless, the force that drives the man of intuition should not be misunderstood as a break with language. On the contrary, while art and myth destroy the complex constellations that philosophy and science build, they remain linguistic acts. The philosopher, the scientist, the artist, and even the sage are all agents of the same symbolic order.

In his early essay ÔNietzsche, Freud, MarxÕ (1964), Michel Foucault further sharpens Nietzsche's critique by distinguishing it from two similar suspicions against language. The first one claims that language covers up rather than contains the truth, while the second suspicions, holds that language is not necessarily verbal. Whereas these two suspicions have existed since language's very beginnings Ð and are also present in 'On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense' Ð Foucault claims that Nietzsche (and to a lesser degree Marx and Freud) adds a third one. His innovation consists in the fact that he refutes the primacy of the sign over interpretation, and even considers signs to be malevolent interpretations. The logic of signs and symbols brings forth NietzscheÕs lies in a nonmoral sense. To him, there are no signs, only interpretations. A sign is simply an interpretation that dissimulates the very fact that it is actually an interpretation. 
	Foucault therefore concludes that this third suspicion against language is incompatible with the semiology of his contemporaries Ð basically all structuralists and post-structuralists Ð and proposes a radical form of hermeneutics instead. This is surprising because many of these thinkers Ð such as Roland Barthes and Jacques Derrida Ð also use ÔOn Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral SenseÕ as a starting point. Foucault claims that semiology is by definition incompatible with NietzscheÕs critique, because it doesn't question the existence of signs as such. It only denies their correspondence with an extra-linguistic state of affairs. Even though this seems to be just a minor difference, its consequence is in fact crucial. Whereas signs are now by definition determined by the absence of a referent, FoucaultÕs notion of interpretation is not crippled by such a restriction. There is never too little interpretation, there is always too much of it. 
	Like his contemporaries George Bataille, Gilles Deleuze and Pierre Klossowski, Foucault uses Nietzsche to make a transition from a metaphysics of absence to an ontology of presence, from an economy of lack to one of abundance, from an ethics of negation to one of affirmation, and finally from a philosophy of representation to a philosophy of creation.9 Nonetheless, one should not hastily mistake creation for art. ÔOn Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral SenseÕ marks a clear break with NietzscheÕs earlier writings Ð most notably The Birth of the Tragedy Ð exactly because art no longer holds a privileged position. The man of intuition is not more or less creative than the rational man. The crucial difference is that the latter produces knowledge through construction, while the former invokes insight by distortion and destruction. In both cases, however, the act itself is creative. Science, philosophy, myth and art move in contradictory directions Ð one could actually still use the terms Apollonian and Dionysian Ð but all stem from a common drive or impulse. The rational man and the man of intuition are both subjects that are produced by a creative will.
	It is Friedrich NietzscheÕs discovery of an underlying drive that is common to both the rational man as well as the man of intuition that allows Michel Foucault to universalize the infinite act of interpretation. His hermeneutics is radical because there is no longer a linguistic truth that has to be produced, discovered, respected, disturbed, or destroyed. Interpretation after Nietzsche is always beyond construction and destruction. Foucault reacts to this predicament by amalgamating these opposing creative impulses in a single, infinite act of interpretation. 
	"On the contrary, a hermeneutic that wraps itself in itself enters the domain of languages which do not cease to implicate themselves, that intermediate region of madness and pure language. It is there that we recognize Nietzsche."10 
From this conclusion, it is only a small step to the rhythmical rambling of the Ol' Dirty Bastard. ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ provides an excellent example of what Foucault calls an Ôintermediate region of madness and pure languageÕ. As argued before, however, the same song also makes it crystal clear that the nonsense that comes from this particular liminal space exceeds the possibilities of hermeneutics, even in the radical Foucauldian sense of the term. ODBÕs insane rhymes foreclose all forms of interpretation, including those that do not try to testify to an absent intra- or extra-textual referent. 
	Despite FoucaultÕs efforts to prove the exact opposite, radical hermeneutics and the end of interpretation turn out to be two sides of the same coin. His strategy to deal with NietzscheÕs language critique is ultimately unsatisfactory. Affirming the infinity of interpretation cleverly avoids the problem of a missing referent, but it still conceives knowledge production as a creative act that is inextricably linked to (some kind of) conventional language. Instead of affirming the symbolic order, I propose to take ÔOn Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral SenseÕ in exactly the opposite direction. NietzscheÕs text not only makes clear that the only relation that an agent can maintain to the world is creative, but also that speaking and writing are just two Ð and perhaps even two of the least adequate Ð possible forms to exercise this relation. In my opinion, Nietzsche does not only point out that all creative acts ultimately stem from the same impulse, he also shows the plurality of these very acts. Rather than homogenizing all of them in a universal act of infinite interpretation, I propose to further pluralize these creative acts. 
	After Nietzsche, the task of intellectuals should consist in discovering, developing and applying creative acts that are not based on metaphor creation. One of the implications of this imperative, however, is that they should stop being philosophers, scientists or artists altogether. Since all these types of intellectual agents are based on a linguistic notion of truth that ÔOn Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral SenseÕ has rendered invalid, knowledge production can no longer be the result of their efforts. In order to avoid infinite repetition of tautologies, these figures need to be transfigured. The consequences of NietzscheÕs critique for the intellectual reach further than just transfiguration, though. It actually distorts the hierarchy and causality between subjects and acts. In ÔOn Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral SenseÕ, agency is no longer attributed to a (human) subject. It is an event in which subjects and acts coincide; subjects and acts simultaneously emerge in a common impulse. Along with the pluralization of creative acts, the intellectual agents that emerge from them are also multiplied. ÔOn Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral SenseÕ calls for a transfiguration as well as a multiplication of intellectual agency. Knowledge is not the prerogative of a particular type of subjects Ð philosophers, scientists and artist Ð or of the members of a certain exclusionary practice Ð schools, universities, churches, sectarian movements Ð but is the result of interventions that bypass, distort or break the straitjacket of metaphor creation. I would like to reserve the term ÔintellectualÕ for the agents that emerge from these creative acts.

Noise is the New Meaning 
I do not have the ambition to give a full or even a partial taxonomy, classification, or inventory of possible intellectuals. Instead, I want to focus on a particular kind of knowledge agent: the sound engineer. In his groundbreaking book Gramophone, Film, Typewriter (1985), German media theorist Friedrich Kittler argues that it is no coincidence that Friedrich Nietzsche develops his critique on language around the same time that sound recording and reproduction were invented.18 In the second half of the nineteenth century, engineers Ð such as ƒdouard-LŽon Scott de Martinville, Charles Cros, Emile Berliner and Thomas Alva Edison Ð were developing a machine that facilitated precisely the type of interventions that ÔOn Truth and Lies in a NonmoralÕ called for: the gramophone. This technical medium enabled storage and transmission of sound and music without resorting to some sort of alphabetical code or musical score. In short, the gramophone made it possible to bypass the symbolic order. The sound engineer is the intellectual agent that emerges from this ontological and epistemological intervention. 
	According to Kittler, the specificity of the gramophone consists in its ability to record and produce noise. Not the reproduction of music and speech, but the crackling and hissing sounds that prevented the listener from hearing music in its purest form, are the record playerÕs innovation. Kittler claims that it was impossible to recognize noise before the invention of this device. In order to store and transmit sound and music, data streams had to be translated into alphabetical characters or musical notes. Everything nonsensical was filtered out in this reductive process. As a result of the technical limitations of written texts, noise could not be recognized as such. Epistemologically and ontologically, it simply did not exist. ÒThanks to the phonograph, science is for the first time in possession of a machine that records noises regardless of so-called meaning.Ó19 Kittler praises the gramophone for rescuing noise from nothingness. The device registers all sounds as changes in frequencies, no matter if they are meaningful or not. Sound recording thereby promotes noise from nothing into nonsense Ð an intermediate space between meaning and void. This ontological intervention determines the epistemology of the analogue age; its technical media transform the outside of meaning into manipulable data flows. 
	ÒThe epoch of nonsense, our epoch, can begin.Ó20 Paradoxically, the engineers of the analogue age desperately tried to eliminate noise, just as its philosophers tried to rid themselves of nonsense. As such, this medial episteme was always striving towards its own destruction.ÊKittler points out that this goal of a static and nonsense-free data streams was not just ill-judged but simply impossible to achieve with the technology of that medial episteme. The gramophone, like all other analogue media, is dependent on the presence of noise in order to store and transmit information. 
ÒThe phonograph does not hear as do ears that have been trained immediately to filter voices, words, and sounds out of noise; it registers acoustic events as such. Articulateness becomes a second-order exception in a spectrum of noise.Ó21
To Kittler, this change in technology forms the foundation of the epistemology of the analogue age. Distortion and interference are the a priori of this medial episteme. Without noise and nonsense there would not have been any information either.  

Friedrich KittlerÕs analysis of the gramophone puts ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ in a completely different light. Michel FoucaultÕs intermediate space between madness and pure language has now become an effect of the epistemological rupture that the gramophone inflicted. The discovery of noise as the constitutive other of information opens up a prelinguistic realm, that was not accessible before. Since this realm of noise is brought into existence through storage and transmission of the gramophone, Kittler identifies it with this technical device. Whereas the OlÕ Dirty Bastard is an extreme agent of the linguistic realm, he is completely absent from the medial realm. In fact, the intermediate space that this persona inhabits is nothing but an effect of technical interventions. The engineer Ð in this case RZA Ð is the agent that is inextricably linked to such creative acts in the medial realm. 
	RZA is not a person, or a metaphor of the sound engineer. Nor do I consider him to be a specimen of this intellectual figure. On the contrary, introducing this hip-hop producer in its singularity is my attempt to further pluralize the figure of the engineer. I use the RZA to show that there is not one creative act that every engineer executes but that hip-hop production is a complex constellation of many different operations. Each producer is indistinguishable from his set of creative acts. Moreover Ð and needless to say Ð hip-hop producers are far from the only kind of engineers. I use RZA here to underscore the singularity of interventions rather than their universal applicability.
	In the remainder of this article, I want to focus on the five interventions from which ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ emerges and the knowledge agent that coincides with them: a sound engineer called RZA. I will argue that these creative acts, which can all be categorized under the heading low-fidelity, exemplify, perform, transform and continue the train of thought that Friedrich Nietzsche began in ÔOn Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense. Rather than being mere musical and technical operations, these interventions bring about an ontological and epistemological rupture. ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ breaks with the linguistic ideal of high-fidelity Ð which is simply the sonic version of truth Ð and the logic of representation that it entails.

Pitch: ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ is build around a looped sample of a slightly detuned piano. Rather than the defect of an actual piano, though, this sound is the result of a technical intervention. A single note is recorded on the ASR-10 Ð the sampler that RZA used to record this song Ð and played back on different keys. Because of the samplerÕs inability to adjust the pitch of the note, the simulated piano sounds off key. 
ÒThe piano is detuned because I sampled the note that I was playing. It couldn't be in tune because they didn't have the time-stretching then. Back then, if you sampled a note and played it on another key of the keyboard, you couldn't keep the same BPMs. Now you can. But back then, I just thought it sounded dope that way.Ó13

Lower sample rate: The songÕs distinctive noise and distortion are the result of a similar technical intervention. Most sounds on ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ are recorded on a lower rate (17.9 kHz) than the ASR-10Õs default (44.1 kHz). 
ÒIf you lower your sample rateÑfrom forty-four to seventeen or twentyÑit increases your sample time. So you get to have longer samples, but with lower resolution. That gives more of a grindy sound, because the sound breaks up. If you lower the sample rate, that means you're missing some of the frequency of the sample. Years later, I heard people call it Ôlo-fi,Õ but I just thought it sounded more ghetto and it let me use more sounds. At that time, 70 percent of my music was sample-rated at 17.9.Ó14 In other words, the low-fidelity of ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ is neither a flaw of the technology nor a lack of engineering skill, but the outcome of the encounter between RZA and the ASR-10.

Reversed samples: This reduced sample rate, however, did not only result in more noise, but also enabled the RZA to sample and reverse the OlÕ Dirty BastardÕs verse in its totality. ÒWhen [The ASR-10] came into my life, that changed my whole game one more time. You could sample for a minute and change, so I could sample a whole verse. That's what's behind a song like "Shimmy Shimmy Ya," which came out in 1995 but was recorded in 1993. The rap verse itself is a sample. Dirty rapped into the ASR, so on the second verse he raps backwardsÑbecause I just reversed the loop.Ó15 

Off beat: Low-fidelity is the result of the negotiations between man and machine. This is also manifested in the most debated aspect of RZAÕs production style, the fact that his beats are not mathematically quantized.16 
ÒIf you go listen, I may have a slight off-beatness to my music, and I realize it's me. Most producers want their bass to hit with their kick, but I don't think you need to. The bass can be wherever the fuck it wants to be, as long as it has a space of operation. Sometimes my bass note isn't even the same key as my kick note. A long time ago I realized music isn't only a note and a melody and a harmony, it's also a pulse.Ó17
In spite of the fact that all modern samplers can electronically compensate for this imperfection, RZA still chooses not to use the quantize function today. ÔThe off-beatness of ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ thereby becomes a reminder of his interventions and agency. 

Headphones as microphones: Since any conclusive sources are missing at this point, this last intervention might as well be an urban myth. Even though its factuality cannot be verified, however, this anecdote is extremely telling about the way ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ abuses technology. It has been rumored that due to financial problems the early RZA recordings (like ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ) were all recorded through headphones rather than microphones. Naturally, a headphone is not optimized to reproduce, let alone record, speech frequencies. This means that voices are distorted from the start. Low-fidelity is not simply the opposite of high-fidelity. Accurate representation of sounds was never at stake here. ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ engineers rather than reproduces a sonic reality. 

ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ marks a threefold transition from meaning to noise, from language to media, and from the scientist/philosopher/artist to the engineer. On a first look, RZAÕs interventions seem to be exemplary for the analogue age. Unfortunately, in KittlerÕs terms the song would actually be the product of another medial episteme: the digital age. Although RZA still uses a vinyl records as a source for samples, the gramophone did not really serve any creative purposes in this song. It was mainly used as an input device. As I have showed before, the engineer primarily used samplers, sequences, and drum computers to construct, mix, and master this track. As opposed to analogue media, noise is not a given with these devices. On the contrary, digital sound technology bypasses almost all physical channels and thereby eliminates the crackling and hissing sounds of the gramophone.23
	Friedrich Kittler, however, once again argues that the ontological and epistemological ramifications of this medial intervention reach much further than just a cleaner sound. He claims that noise in the digital age, has become either the calculated result of commercial compromises or a simulated surface effect: hard economics or pure aesthetics. ÒInside the computers themselves everything becomes a number: quantity- without image, sound, or voice.Ó24 Ontologically and epistemologically, there is no room for noise in the digital age. On a hardware level, computers only know 1 and 0 Ð information and nothing Ð and cannot deal with intermediate values. With the fulfillment of the immanent telos of the analogue age Ð the complete elimination of noise Ð nonsense becomes void (again), language can no longer access its prelinguistic other (again) and becomes hegemonic (again). In short, the demise of the gramophone coincides with the death of irrationality. Posed like this, the madness of OlÕ Dirty Bastard and the static in ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ are just simulacra; nostalgic remainders of a vanished medial episteme.
	This apocalyptic account of the tragic fate of the analogue age leads to a dilemma: nostalgia or optimism. Either one laments the loss of a unique epistemological opportunity Ð to recognize the unrecognizable Ð that analogue media offered, or one tries to search for the immanent, subversive possibilities of their digital successors. ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ is a song that refuses to choose between the two horns of this dilemma and progressively maintains a backward gaze towards the analogue age. By producing its noises and scratches, however, ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ does not simulate a gramophone. Instead, these sounds highlight the creative acts of the engineer. Whereas the gramophone did not survive the transition from the analogue to the digital age, its agent is still alive. 
	Just like the sound engineers of the analogue age countered the medium specificity of the gramophone (by striving for high-fidelity), ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ also uses the equipment against the grain (low-fidelity). ÒThe limitations of technology can become artistic tools themselves. They can point the way.Ó (RZA, 191) The crucial thing in all of RZAÕs interventions is not noise and nonsense, but the fact that he does not use the medium in the ÔproperÕ way. Nonetheless, these interventions could not have been possible without the technology either. The producer of ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ neither negates the medium (Foucault) nor does he allow the medium to negate him (Kittler). Through his interventions, RZA negotiates with the technology at hand. In my opinion, this particular situated agent thereby challenges KittlerÕs apocalyptic prophesy about the hermetically closed nature of the digital age. His engineering shows that interventions from a prelinguistic, medial realm are still possible in this new medial episteme; it just demands different creative acts. RZA thereby stays closer to ÔOn Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral SenseÕ than both Foucault and Kittler. NietzscheÕs provocation does not ask for an affirmation of the groundlessness of the Gutenberg Galaxy, nor does it proclaim the end of agency. Nietzsche urges philosophers to take knowledge production into the age of technological media. ÔShimmy Shimmy YaÕ does exactly that. 

Bibliography
Bataille, Georges. On Nietzsche. St. Paul: Paragon House. 1994.
de Certeau, Michel. The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley: University of California Press. 1984.
Deleuze, Gilles. Nietzsche and Philosophy. London: Continuum. 2002.
Dyson, Michael Eryc. Know What I Mean? Reflections on Hip-Hop. New York: Basic Civitas Books, 2007
Ellison, Ralph. ÒLiving with MusicÓ in Shadow and Act, 187-197. New York: Random House. 1964.
Eshun Kodwo. More Brilliant than the Sun. London: Quartet Books. 1998.
Foucault, Michel. ÔNietzsche, Freud, MarxÕ in Aesthetics, Method and Epistemology. The Essential Works of Michel Foucault 1954-1984, 269-278. London: Penguin Books. 2000.
Kittler, Friedrich. Gramophone, Film, Typewriter. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 1999.
Klossowski, Piere. Nietzsche and the Vicious Circle. London: The Athlone Press. 1997.
LŽvi-Strauss, Claude. The Savage Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 1966.
Muklashy, Wasim, ÒRZA Interview: Shaolin SecretsÓ in Remix Magazine, November 2007. http://remixmag.com/artists/hiphop_R&B/remix_shaolin_secrets/ (accessed March 3, 2008).
Neal, Mark Anthony. Soul Babies: Black Popular Culture and the Post-Soul Aesthetic. New York: Routledge. 2003.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. ÔOn Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral SenseÕ in From Modernism to Postmodernism. An Anthology, edited by Lawrence Calhoon, 109-116. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. 2003.
Rose, Tricia. Black Noise: Rap Music and Black Culture in Contemporary America. Hanover: Wesleyan University Press. 1994. 
RZA. Wu-Tang Manual. New York: Penguin Group. 2005.
Schloss, Joseph G. Making Beats. The art of sample-based hip-hop. Middletown: Wesleyan University Press. 2004.
West, Cornel. The Cornel West Reader. New York: Basic Civitas Books, 1999.

1	Ellison, ÒLiving with MusicÓ, 187.
2	The second single from the album Return to the 36 Chambers: The Dirty Version (1995)
3 	An effect that is clearly visualized in the video accompanying his song ÔBrooklyn ZooÕ (1995), the first single from Return to the 36 Chambers.
4 	In minstrel performances, black bodies were basically reduced to a single organ: the mouth. Many thanks to Yasco Horsman for bringing this observation to my attention.
5 	One of the aims of this article is to show that the academic relevance of hip-hop exceeds identity politics. Although I acknowledge the huge emancipatory effect of black music, the academic debates by people such as Tricia Rose, Mark Anthony Neal, Cornel West and Michael Eryc Dyson tend to reduce this complex aesthetic practice into a singular political issue. Furthermore, the emphasis on identity in hip-hop studies leads to an overvaluing of the lyrics and the rapper at the expense of the beats and the produces. Kodwo EshunÕs More Brilliant than the Sun and Joseph G, SchlossÕs Making Beats. The art of sample-based hip-hop are both studies that successfully try to compensate for this lack.
6	Claude LŽvi-Strauss introduces the figure of the engineer as the double of his famous bricoleur. Whereas the bricoleur uses Òwhatever is at handÓ (17) and accepts the limits of a closed universe, the engineer continuously tries to apply these same means to break out of this predicament. 
7 	For Michel de Certeau the engineer is the figure that operates on the threshold between discourse and its outside. Since this is by definition a realm where (discursive) knowledge loses its value, he argues that the engineer possesses different skills and knowledge in order to act. 
8 	Nietzsche, ÒOn Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral SenseÓ, 112.
9 	In their respective studies Ð On Nietzsche (1945), Nietzsche and Philosophy (1966) and Nietzsche and the Vicious Circle (1969 Ð these three French thinkers were responsible for revaluating NietzscheÕs work after the second world war.
10	Foucault, Aesthetic, Method and Epistemology, 278.
13 	RZA, Wu-Tang Manual, 191.
14 	Ibid., 197.
15 	Ibid., 198.
16 	In his anthropological study, Making Beats. The art of sample-based hip-hop, Joseph G. Schloss gives a lot of attention to an often heard critique amongst the local hip-hop producers that he has interviewed. These Seattle based producers claim that RZAÕs beats are bad because they are not quantized. Samson S. for instance says: ÒAwww, man, his beats is sloppyÉ But that was part of his appeal, initiallyÉ Ôcause you like, ÔOh yeah, he just donÕt give a fuck.ÕÉ But after a while while, you know, it got tiring. HeÕll still do a dope beat or two every now and then. But. yeah, he doesnÕt quantize his beats properly. And he knows that.Ó (141) In my opinion, however, these arguments completely miss the point because they refer back to exactly the notions of high-fidelity, authenticity and accuracy that RZA breaks with. To him, there is no proper way.
17 	Wasim Muklashy, Remix Magazine 11/07
18 	Although the gramophone was actually introduced seven years after ÔOn Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral SenseÕ was written, NietzscheÕs essay already anticipates this device. In order to point out the conventional and relative nature of human knowledge, the existence of one or more perspectives outside of language is already presupposed. Ò[I}f each of us had a different kind of sense perception Ð if we could only perceive things now as a bird, now as a worm, now as a plant, or if one saw a stimulus as red, another as blue while a third even heard the same stimulus as a sound Ð then no one would speak of such a regularity of nature, rather, nature would be grasped only as a creation which is subjective in its highest degree.Ó (114) Unwittingly, Nietzsche already left the Gutenberg-Galaxy behind him. He was part of the age of technical media. Even though, Nietzsche identifies the different perspectives with the sense perception of animals, they are in fact those of technical media. It is the camera that allows man to see the world from the perspective of a bird or a worm, and it is the gramophone that can transform optical traces into sound. Whereas Michel Foucault Ð at least until The Order of Discourse (1970) Ð equates knowledge with written texts, Friedrich Nietzsche already explores the distinctive expressive modalities of new media.
19	Kittler, Gramophone, Film, Typewriter, 85
20 	Ibid., 85.
21 	Ibid., 23.
22 	Ibid.. 83.
23 	In practice, however, this account of digital media is a bit too simplistic. In order to reach the viewer, reader or listener, a translation from digital back into visual and/or acoustic signals is still necessary. For Kittler, however, this is unimportant because he claims that media are not made for people. To him, they are autonomous. Sound, texts, and images are just interfaces. 
24 	Kittler, Gramophone, Film, Typewriter, 1.



